[MUSIC]
>> Kyle: That brings us to
this idea of concurrency.
What does concurrency mean?
A lot of people think concurrent means
two things happening at the same time.
Again, it's one of those things if you
squint at it you might say, yeah, maybe
they're kinda like the same but there's
an important nuance difference here.
And by the way, if somebody wants
to object to my particular usage of
the words, there's actually lots of
different meanings for these words.
And it's hard to nail down
one particular thing, so
I'm trying to be is consistent
within my own usage of these things.
But there's actually, if you go and
read Wikipedia pages or other text on it,
you'll find a whole range of
different opinions on these things.
But my way of explaining to you what
concurrency is rather than saying with
parallelism two things are happening at
the exact same instant, I would describe
concurrency as two higher level tasks
happening within the same timeframe.
So rather than an instant,
we're going to look at a timeframe.
We're gonna say within this timeframe,
two higher level operations
are going to occur.
To understand the notion of higher
level items or higher level operations
occurring, we also have to understand that
higher level, or what I might call macro
level tasks can be broken up or thought of
as being broken up into micro level tasks.
So here's a way to visualize the macro
level and the micro level, and
how these things might go together.
So the left-hand side we have this yellow
orange task, with a macro level task.
Which is broken up into those
individual numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Which would be micro level tasks.
These are my made up terms,
these aren't official terms.
But macro level and micro level tasks.
And then, on the right-hand side, we have
another macro level task represented by
that blue green color, and
it's broken up into three pieces, 1, 2, 3.
Now, for the easiness of math
I'm going to pretend and
assume that each one of these micro level
tasks takes one full second to complete.
So this overall system to do all of the
tasks it's going to take seven seconds,
does everybody agree with that?.
Cuz it's a single threaded system.
Now, that could happen at
exactly the same moment.
So those one second micro level tasks are
going to have to be scheduled in some way
that all seven of them finish and
that's gonna take seven seconds.
Let's pretend that the yellow orange
represents an Ajax request and
response cycle.
Fire off a request we
get a response back and
let's pretend that the blue represents
a scroll that we scroll on the page and
it repainted everything because we
scrolled to a new location of the page.
These two operations have to
fundamentally happen on the same thread.
The entire user interface of our browser
is happening on the same thread so
our JavaScript, the garbage collector
the style engine, the repaint, everything,
it's all happening on one thread which
means we kinda have to worry about
contention and if you've ever had an
animation on your page have jitter in it.
You know why that happened?
Because something contended on the UI
thread at that moment your CSS engine
was trying to your style your layout
engine was trying to repaint the page.
It's a 60 frames a second way
that it's repainting your page.
It tried to do that but at that exact
moment something else was running.
So I had to wait an extra moment and
that's what created that jitter,
single threaded.
So if we have these higher level,
macro level tasks that we
want to happen concurrently.
I want the yellow and
the blue to happen at the same time.
Why?
Well, let's imagine they don't.
One way of scheduling this system, one way
of scheduling this program is to do all of
the yellow first and then all of the blue.
What would that look like on our page?
Ignoring the one second thing for
a moment, what it would look like on our
page Is that it would look like I click
the button to make an Ajax request and
while that was happening I
tried to scroll my page but
everything was completely
frozen while that happened.
And then, after it finished then it
sort of jumped back and caught up.
Ways I precedent for that It's called
synchronous XHR, synchronous Ajax.
One of the worst evils perpetrated
upon the web platforms.
Terrible idea.
There are people out there that
are crying and literally complaining
on standards list saying,
how dare you take away my synchronous XHR?
It's been deprecated and
removed from the web platform
because it's a really bad idea.
It's a terrible idea to schedule
it that way isn't it because
even though the overall system
would still take seven seconds
that particular choice of
scheduling those micro level tasks.
Would feel terribly inefficient
does somebody agree with that
just from a user experience perspective.
If on the other hand we chose to
interleave these things together.
Where one thing might be blocking so
we can do something else while one thing
is blocking before it can move on to
the next thing, if we chose to schedule
those things in an inner leaved fashion,
the overall system might still
in fact take seven seconds.
But the perception of the performance
is that things are gonna be happening
in parallel really more importantly
we should be saying those things
are happening concurrently.
The Ajax and request and
response is happening
concurrently with the repainting.
Even though at any given instant only one
of those micro level tasks is occurring.
So just to visualize that my fancy
animation took me about two hours to
get right in Keynote, here's a way of
scheduling those micro level tasks onto
that single thread in the middle
called the event loop.
I don't know why it advance, the single
thread in the middle called the event loop
that's what we call it in JavaScript.
At any given instance only
doing one of those things.
So when you have an Ajax
request that comes back and
you need to fire the cal back for
a response.
If at that moment somebody
is already executing.
Nobody gets to cut in line.
It's not like your response
callback gets to interrupt and say,
it's time for me to run.
You know what it does?
It gets at the end of the line
just like everybody else.
So when the garbage collector says,
I need to collect some garbage.
And the style CSS repainter says,
I need to repaint the page.
And the layout engines says,
I need to do some work.
And the JavaScript engine,
says I need to fire this response call
back in every single one of them.
It's a first come first serve,
everybody gets at the end of the line.
That is fundamentally
what the event loop is.
Such is the high level view to
help you sort out what's going on.
And the main point here is that
the scheduling of this is not always
entirely within our control.
Sometimes it's race conditions that
choose one versus the other happening.
Not all that's happening, but there's
an awful lot of coordination necessary.
Sometimes it's the coordination
of when things happen,
but oftentimes it's the coordination
of responses to things happening.
Cuz it's not always a very serial,
like do this and, and
when that's finished do this and then when
that's an issue that oftentimes it's much
more complex like hey go do
these three things in parallel.
And then, when at least two of them
have finished you can move on and
do this other thing and then when
that third one comes along you can
branch out here and do this other thing.
And before long.
It's just crazy complex tree of different
states of things that could happen, and
it's that complexity that we
have to manage in our programs.
It's that complexity that begs for
us to have better patterns for
concurrency management.
That's what asynchronous programming is,
managing our concurrency.
So that's a motivation for
you from a philosophical and
conceptual basis of the motivation for
why we go to the lengths that we do to
try to write the programs that we do.
Everything that I'm gonna show you in
this workshop is something that could
fundamentally be done with nothing but
the callback with no new functionality.
But we're gonna see that the callbacks
fundamentally are Insufficient for
expressing the higher and
higher orders of complexity that our
modern JavaScript programs are doing.
Our modern JavaScript programs
are falling all over themselves,
because we need these
higher order patterns, and
we're not disciplined enough to
learn them and implement them.
We just keep doing the same thing we've
always done, because it always worked, and
it always worked, and it always worked.
This is a call to arms to say the new
baseline of competency as a JavaScript
developers is to have a much more
sophisticated strategic and tactical
approach to your concurrency management,
to your asynchronous programming.